Add instructions for 3.5->3.4 downgrade. (#847)
etcd-io/website: content/en/docs/v3.5/downgrades/downgrade_3_5.md

---
title: Downgrade etcd from 3.5 to 3.4
weight: 6650
description: Processes, checklists, and notes on downgrading etcd from 3.5 to 3.4
---

> In the general case, downgrading from etcd 3.5 to 3.4 can be a zero-downtime, rolling downgrade:

Author: done.

 - one by one, stop the etcd v3.5 processes and replace them with etcd v3.4 processes
 - after starting any v3.4 processes, new features in v3.5 are not longer available to the cluster

Before [starting an downgrade](#downgrade-procedure), read through the rest of this guide to prepare.

### Downgrade checklists

> **NOTE:** If your cluster enables auth, rolling downgrade from 3.5 isn't supported because 3.5 [changes a format of WAL entries related to auth](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/pull/11943).

Author: added instructions to disable auth.

---
title: Downgrade etcd from 3.5 to 3.4
weight: 6650
description: Processes, checklists, and notes on downgrading etcd from 3.5 to 3.4
---

In the general case, downgrading from etcd 3.5 to 3.4 can be a zero-downtime, rolling downgrade:
 - one by one, stop the etcd v3.5 processes and replace them with etcd v3.4 processes
 - after starting any v3.4 processes, new features in v3.5 are not longer available to the cluster

Before [starting an downgrade](#downgrade-procedure), read through the rest of this guide to prepare.

### Downgrade checklists

**NOTE:** If your cluster enables auth, rolling downgrade from 3.5 isn't supported because 3.5 [changes a format of WAL entries related to auth](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/pull/11943).

Highlighted breaking changes from 3.5 to 3.4:

#### Difference in flags

If you are using any of the following flags in your v3.5 configurations, make sure to remove, rename, or change the default value when downgrading to v3.4.

```diff

> # flags not available in 3.4

Reviewer: Interesting list, which versions exact the diff comes from. I think we backported some flags to v3.4, so the exact diff differs from version to version. Possibly the best solution would be to clarify how user can get the diff for their version or to specify that this diff comes from latest patch version.

Author: done

#### Mixed versions

While downgrading, an etcd cluster supports mixed versions of etcd members, and operates with the protocol of the lowest common version. The cluster is considered downgraded once any of its members is downgraded to version 3.4. Internally, etcd members negotiate with each other to determine the overall cluster version, which controls the reported version and the supported features.

#### Limitations

Note: If the cluster only has v3 data and no v2 data, it is not subject to this limitation.

If the cluster is serving a v2 data set larger than 50MB, each newly downgraded member may take up to two minutes to catch up with the existing cluster. Check the size of a recent snapshot to estimate the total data size. In other words, it is safest to wait for 2 minutes between downgrading each member.

For a much larger total data size, 100MB or more , this one-time process might take even more time. Administrators of very large etcd clusters of this magnitude can feel free to contact the [etcd team][etcd-contact] before downgrading, and we'll be happy to provide advice on the procedure.

#### Rollback

> If any member has been downgraded to v3.4, the cluster will be downgraded to v3.4, and the cluster and its operations will be "v3.4". You would need to follow the [Upgrade etcd from 3.4 to 3.5](../../upgrades/upgrade_3_5/) instructions to rollback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any member has been downgraded to v3.4, the cluster version will be downgraded to v3.4, and  operations will be "v3.4" compatible. You would need to follow the [Upgrade etcd from 3.4 to 3.5](../../upgrades/upgrade_3_5/) instructions to rollback.
```

Please [download the snapshot backup](../../op-guide/maintenance/#snapshot-backup) to make downgrading the cluster possible even after it has been completely downgraded.

### Downgrade procedure

This example shows how to downgrade a 3-member v3.5 etcd cluster running on a local machine.

#### Step 1: check downgrade requirements

Is the cluster healthy and running v3.5.x?

```bash
etcdctl --endpoints=localhost:2379,localhost:22379,localhost:32379 endpoint health
<<COMMENT
localhost:2379 is healthy: successfully committed proposal: took = 2.118638ms
localhost:22379 is healthy: successfully committed proposal: took = 3.631388ms
localhost:32379 is healthy: successfully committed proposal: took = 2.157051ms
COMMENT

curl http://localhost:2379/version
<<COMMENT
{"etcdserver":"3.5.0","etcdcluster":"3.5.0"}
COMMENT

curl http://localhost:22379/version
<<COMMENT
{"etcdserver":"3.5.0","etcdcluster":"3.5.0"}
COMMENT

curl http://localhost:32379/version
<<COMMENT
{"etcdserver":"3.5.0","etcdcluster":"3.5.0"}
COMMENT
```

> #### Step 2: download snapshot backup from leader

Reviewer: I think it's overkill to instruct how to take snapshot from leader. Followers should not be much behind and it complicates the procedure.

Author: removed

```bash
curl -sL http://localhost:2379/metrics | grep etcd_server_is_leader
<<COMMENT
# HELP etcd_server_is_leader Whether or not this member is a leader. 1 if is, 0 otherwise.
# TYPE etcd_server_is_leader gauge
etcd_server_is_leader 1
COMMENT

curl -sL http://localhost:22379/metrics | grep etcd_server_is_leader
<<COMMENT
etcd_server_is_leader 0
COMMENT

curl -sL http://localhost:32379/metrics | grep etcd_server_is_leader
<<COMMENT
etcd_server_is_leader 0
COMMENT

etcdctl --endpoints=localhost:2379 snapshot save backup.db
<<COMMENT
{"level":"info","ts":1526585787.148433,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:109","msg":"created temporary db file","path":"backup.db.part"}
{"level":"info","ts":1526585787.1485257,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:120","msg":"fetching snapshot","endpoint":"localhost:2379"}
{"level":"info","ts":1526585787.1519694,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:133","msg":"fetched snapshot","endpoint":"localhost:2379","took":0.003502721}
{"level":"info","ts":1526585787.1520295,"caller":"snapshot/v3_snapshot.go:142","msg":"saved","path":"backup.db"}
Snapshot saved at backup.db
COMMENT
```

> #### Step 3: stop one existing etcd server

Reviewer: Here I would recommend avoiding stopping the leader to prevent 1-2 second downtime. This can be done by using move-leader command.

Author: done
